The onco-protein epidermal growth factor (EGF) initiates a cascade that includes activation of the ERK and AKT signaling pathways and alters gene expression. We describe a new action of EGF-EGF receptor (EGFR), rapid anticipatory activation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor, the unfolded protein response (UPR).Within 2 min, EGF elicits EGFR dependent activation of phospholipase C ? (PLC?),producing inositol triphosphate (IP3), which binds to IP3 receptor (IP3R), opening the endoplasmic reticulum IP3R Ca(2+) channels, resulting in increased intracellular Ca(2+). This calcium release leads to transient and moderate activation of the IRE1? and ATF6? arms of the UPR, resulting in induction of BiPchaperone. Knockdown or inhibition of EGFR, PLC? or IP3R blocks the increase in intracellular Ca(2+). While blocking the increase in intracellular Ca(2+) by locking the IP3R calcium channel with 2-APB had no effect on EGF activation of the ERK or AKT signaling pathways, it abolished the rapid EGF-mediated inductionand repression of gene expression. Knockdown of ATF6? or XBP1, which regulate UPR-induced chaperone production, inhibited EGF stimulated cell proliferation. Supporting biological relevance, increased levels of EGF receptor during tumor progression were correlated with increased expression of the UPR gene signature.Anticipatory activation of the UPR is a new role for EGF. Since UPR activation occurs in <2 min, it is an initial cell response when EGF binds EGFR. 
Aberrant activation of the EGF receptor (EGFR) contributes to many human cancers by activating the Ras-MAPK pathway and other pathways. EGFR signaling is augmented by Src-family kinases, but the mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we show that human EGFR preferentially phosphorylates peptide substrates that are primed by a prior phosphorylation. Using peptides based on the sequence of the adaptor protein Shc1, we show that Src mediates the priming phosphorylation, thus promoting subsequent phosphorylation by EGFR. Importantly, the doubly phosphorylated Shc1 peptide binds more tightly than singly phosphorylated peptide to the Ras activator Grb2; this binding is a key step in activating the Ras-MAPK pathway. Finally, a crystal structure of EGFR in complex with a primed Shc1 peptide reveals the structural basis for EGFR substrate specificity. These results provide a molecular explanation for the integration of Src and EGFR signaling with downstream effectors such as Ras.
Neuronal differentiation in PC12 cells induced by nerve growth factor (NGF) requires sustained activation of ERK/MAP kinase pathway (Raf-MEK-ERK cascade). Although classical Ras (H-Ras, K-Ras, and N-Ras) activated by NGF signaling induces activation of ERK pathway, the activation is transient and not sufficient for PC12 cell differentiation. Instead, it has been widely accepted that NGF signaling-mediated Rap1 activation causes sustained activation of ERK pathway. There has been no direct evidence, however, that Rap1 participates in neuronal differentiation. Here we show that NGF signaling induces sustained activation of  M-Ras and subsequent sustained activation of ERK pathway and the transcription factor CREB leading to PC12 cell differentiation. Exogenously expressed constitutively active mutant of M-Ras caused neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells and  activating phosphorylation of ERK, whereas activated Rap1 did not. Knockdown of endogenous M-Ras by small interfering RNAs as well as the expression of a dominant-negative mutant of M-Ras interfered with NGF-induced neuritogenesis. Since MEK inhibitors prevented M-Ras-induced neurite outgrowth, ERK pathway participates in this differentiation pathway. Furthermore, M-Ras brought about ERK pathway-mediated activating phosphorylation of CREB and the CREB-mediated transcription. In addition, a dominant-negative mutant of CREB inhibited M-Ras-induced neuritogenesis. Taken together, NGF-induced PC12 cell differentiation requires M-Ras-ERK pathway-mediated activation of CREB. M-Ras was predominantly expressed in the hippocampus and cerebellum of mouse brain and in the gray matter of the spinal cord. All these properties of M-Ras were apparently indistinguishable from those of H-Ras. However, NGF stimulation caused transient  activation of classical Ras proteins but sustained activation of M-Ras as well as sustained activating phosphorylation of ERK and CREB. Therefore, M-Ras is essential for neuronal differentiation in PC12 cells by inducing sustained activation of ERK pathway.
The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) transactivator protein Tax is critical for the activation of viral gene expression and the transformation of T-lymphocytes. Tax activation of HTLV-I gene expression is mediated by three highly homologous regulatory elements known as 21 bp repeats which bind the transcription factor CREB. Questions remain about the mechanism by which Tax can stimulate CREB binding, whether Tax alters CREB binding affinity, what specific sequences in the HTLV-I 21 bp repeat mediate ternary complex formation, and if the ternary complex comprised of Tax and CREB can recruit coactivators such as CBP. To address these points, we used immobilized templates containing either the HTLV-I 21 bp repeats or the somatostatin CRE to assay Tax association with ATF/CREB family members. Tax formed a stable ternary complex on each of the 21 bp repeats with the transcription factor CREB but not related ATF/CREB proteins. In contrast, Tax did not form a similar complex on the CREB binding site in the somatostatin promoter. The formation of this complex was dependent on 3' sequences flanking the CREB binding site within each of the 21 bp repeats and resulted in marked increases in CREB association and binding affinity. Tax increased the binding of phosphorylated CREB to the 21 bp repeat resulting in increased association of the coactivator CBP. However, Tax did not form a complex on the somatostatin CRE in the presence of either phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated CREB and it did not stimulate CBP association to this element. These studies extend previous work and demonstrate how specific DNA sequences flanking the CREB binding site regulate the formation of a stable ternary complex that is able to more efficiently recruit the coactivator CBP.

